Source freshness (#6744)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/build/sources.md

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/building-a-dbt-project/snapshot-freshness.png" title="Uh oh! Not everything is as fresh as we'd like!"/>

> ### Build models based on source freshness

Reviewer: overall, i might be misunderstanding but don't really get what this section is trying to communicate? is it trying to tell us about how source freshness works? yr about tests? the header mentions its about building models based on source freshness but i dont really understand how a user would do that based on this info?

> dbt has a feature to [check the freshness](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/sources#declaring-source-freshness) (how up to date) of a specific source. This functionality is specifically designed for sources and does not apply to models.

Reviewer: per style guide, we use relative path and not absolute
```suggestion
dbt has a feature to [check the freshness](/docs/build/sources#declaring-source-freshness) (how up to date) of a specific source. This functionality is specifically designed for sources and does not apply to models.
```

Neither `dbt source freshness` nor `dbt test` will perform any freshness checking of models. This is intentional because, in a typical dbt project, raw data usually comes in as sources. Your models then transform this data by selecting from those sources. If your source data is fresh, there's generally no need to perform freshness checks on your models as well.

> However, dbt does however does provide the flexibility for users to create their own [generic tests](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/tests#generic-tests) that they can then apply to models.

Reviewer: per style guide, we use relative path and not absolute

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/building-a-dbt-project/snapshot-freshness.png" title="Uh oh! Not everything is as fresh as we'd like!"/>

### Build models based on source freshness

Our best practice recommendation is to use [data source freshness](/docs/build/sources#declaring-source-freshness). This will allow settings to be transfered into a `.yml` file where source freshness is defined on [model level](/reference/resource-properties/freshness).

To build models based on source freshness in dbt:

1. Run `dbt source freshness` to check the freshness of your sources.
2. Use the `dbt build --select source_status:fresher+` command to build and test models downstream of fresher sources.

> By using the commands in that order, it ensures models are updated based on the latest data.

Author: ```suggestion
By using the commands in that order, it ensures models are updated based on the latest data. This also eliminates wasted compute cycles on data that has not changed or updated and only builds models when necessary.
```

> Using these commands in order makes sure models update with the latest data. This eliminates wasted compute cycles on unchanged data and build models _only_ when necessary. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using these commands in order makes sure models update with the latest data. This eliminates wasted compute cycles on unchanged data and builds models _only_ when necessary. 
```

> By using the commands in that order, it ensures models are updated based on the latest data. This also eliminates wasted compute cycles on data that has not changed or updated and only builds models when necessary.

Reviewer: sugg active voice
```suggestion
Using these commands in order makes sure models update with the latest data. This eliminates wasted compute cycles on unchanged data and build models _only_ when necessary. 
```

> Additionally, [source freshness snapshots](/docs/deploy/source-freshness#enabling-source-freshness-snapshots) can be set to 30 minutes to check for source freshness and then run a job which rebuilds every 1 hour. This will retrieve all the models and rebuild them in one go if their source freshness has expired. For more information, refer to [Source freshness snapshot frequency](/docs/deploy/source-freshness#source-freshness-snapshot-frequency).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set [source freshness snapshots](/docs/deploy/source-freshness#enabling-source-freshness-snapshots) to 30 minutes to check for source freshness, then run a job which rebuilds every hour to rebuild model. This setup retrieves all the models and rebuild them in one attempt if their source freshness has expired. For more information, refer to [Source freshness snapshot frequency](/docs/deploy/source-freshness#source-freshness-snapshot-frequency).
```
